[Music]
yes yes y y okay great okay um I decided
to call this the hegemony of normal
psychiatry
uh and an attempt to
explain um how how abuses become
normalized uh especially unpleasant and
painful treatments um electroconvulsive
therapy is one of my main examples of
this and how it's used in um India and
the
US and uh to to do so in in terms of the
topic of of
this of this session um let me just I
realize I can't see the time on my
screen so I'm just making sure I have my
phone here keep me up on what time it is
okay um so you know the description for
this this meeting
um
discusses political abuse of Psychiatry
involving what we might call explicit
forms of power you know very um an
oppressive state where you know
dissidents are are branded mentally ill
uh
where incarceration you know with a
justification of mental health is is is
used and um one of the first things that
comes to my mind and terms of this
presentation of power is comes from
social theory the social theory that I
teach in in uh history of theory uh in
in anthropology
classes and I want to say a few words
about that these May maybe theorists
that you you all know well but um I want
to think about political abuses of power
not in a situation where the political
abuse is directly you know boldly and
blatantly political like you know
putting you know diagnosing dissidence
although that happens um I want to
discuss the you know the political abuse
in a place where the politics is less
explicit less clear um certainly we
could see you know in if we look at
looked at the the Soviet Union or or
today's Russia under Putin uh a very
explicit uh regime of power where you
you know you know where the power is and
you kind of know what you can and can't
say and and you can easily be you know
in prison just for being someone who you
know runs for political office but um
Psychiatry can be abused in the in the
interest of the state and um but in in
many
societies um I don't know perhaps most
societies I'm not sure how to quantify
this uh you know a place that is not a
fascist
country um you have political power
happening happening in a more subtle way
through through processes such as those
that Antonio grami and Michelle huko
have examined you you may know grami's
work on on hegemony um sorry just a
second let me let that is a dog
scratching my door I just want to let it
so he
doesn't
so gr grami uh if you don't know his
story he was um imprisoned by by
musolini uh and wrote um a series on
writings on social analysis uh that's
has been published as the prison
notebooks and he wrote both about the
you know explicit domination which is
what he was experiencing as being a
dissident um in mus melini's Italy and
being imprisoned for his politics and
what he called hegemony which is the
more
subtle equally powerful um set of
ideologies and politics that are not
recognized necessarily as being part of
the system of
power and in social theory many of us
have adopted the idea of hegemony you
know that there is there is a you know
hegemonic way of thinking um that that
dominates in society and but the key
idea in heemy is that the people who
adopt the thinking even if it's not in
their interests they still take it to be
just common sense um rather than
something that's come coming from you
know those those with power um it's sort
of every everyday uh forms of power that
doesn't speak its name and is not
obvious this these taken for granted
forms of common sense that we just think
of as natural that are in fact produced
according to certain interests not in a
conspiratorial way the you know people
with power tend to depict the world in
the way that they uh think is simply
real but it is actually their uh
privileged perspective and and many
people will just adopt those views as
common
sense and Michelle Fuko you know
probably the most influential social
thinker since I don't know maybe Max
vber or Carl Marx or Anil
durkheim um you know took took power in
his writing out of the explicitly
political as well and and showed us how
power is is everywhere even in as he
says the capillary forms you know the
little tiny everyday um behaviors and
assumptions through which it is acted
out and he was famous for also putting
the world of medicine and the world of
Mental Health in the world of power the
medical system was not something that
was AB absent power um Power and
hierarchy were shot through with it and
this isn't just the power where you know
like drug companies have money that kind
of obvious power um it is the power that
again is more more subtle but but very
powerful where you know he he he
discusses Public Health you know Public
Health involves counting the population
and finding out who you know has what
illness and and and how the state can
manage a population given that
information involves collecting
information on on populations people
when they're living in these um these
countries today sort of a normal
Democratic State uh you know by being
counted and by interacting with the
state become
surveyors they they you know
surveillance is is taught to people and
they they kind of restrict themselves
that's the modern subject according to
Fuko so so both both of these thinkers
discuss how you know how power and
hierarchy operate in um in in in really
everyday life in in non-explicit
ways and I I bring those up because the
the kind of abuse political abuse of
power that I want to discuss in India
and the us through psychiatry
is is happening in this way you not it's
not the you know the state um you know
rounding up a cab of dissidence it's
It's the the common sense of
Psychiatry uh and the the that the
abuses that that come with that that's
why I called this the the gemy of normal
Psychiatry I I'll say a few words first
about the work I've I've done in India
and one of the the claims i' I've
published I did field work at several
points uh since the 1990s in in Southern
India in the state of
kerola and in that research I I focused
on the three major forms of therapy for
mental health problems and those are as
you see in the slide um Psychiatry
Western Psychiatry it goes by many
different names in India allopathic
medicine English medicine
um and I put the term biomedicine in
there because that's what medical
anthropologists my my field um uses to
designate this General hegemonic Medical
system that's around the world that
doesn't really have a label often other
than medicine or sometimes it's Western
medicine um biom medicine was was
invented as a term to get away from the
the Western idea because it is a global
medicine now um anyway biom medicine is
not a perfect label either but and to
move on the irva irva is the largest
indigenous medical system of India it's
institutionalized in the forms of
clinics and hospitals um it's not quote
unquote traditional or folk healing or
anything like that it's an elaborated
medical system with a
pharmacopia um medical literature uh
research
journals it's a system of itself and uh
and and it is
practiced U pretty significantly the
actually the psychiatric side of that
the the focus on Mental Health in the
state of carola um India I'm I'm sorry
Murphy um yes your slides they are not
moving oh they ar oh
no okay uh oh um
H I wonder why see the F we can only see
the the title slide you're still on the
first one okay yeah I'm sorry I didn't
say anything but yeah I was
checking um let me see
um let's see I'm clicking on start from
the beginning okay uh did do you see the
second slide now
no
um well that's unfortunate I wonder what
what is the glitch I wonder maybe it's
the browser I'm using or can you can you
just double click on the second slide
you want to use actually I'm seeing now
that I'm back on I I was looking from
the slides let me just see if I can um
now that I'm on the I'm looking on the
Google meet screen maybe that helps um
sharing your entire screen or browser
can cause an infinity mirror okay um
maybe I need to ignore that um let me
and on
the yeah there you go that's it
yeah I think it seems as if I toggle
between the PowerPoint and and my
browser I guess that makes it work so
I'll try so anyway I'll just these these
are some of the slides that correspond
to what I just said and you know having
given a bit of social theory about this
this way of looking at Power
um let
me uh move the PowerPoint to and I had a
map of
the state of Kerala um to locate where
I've done work in
India um are you are you all seeing
that okay I think okay I think I've got
it now um and
then the
three uh the the three systems of
medicine I was discussing are just are
listed here I think I was talking about
ayurveda um and the use of ayurvedic
psychiatry in India and then uh
religious therapies I I went to um
Muslim Christian and Hindu uh sites that
are known uh for healing mental health
problems which which may appear in other
idioms such as Spirit possession and a
variety of
ritual uh engagements are used to to to
help uh people get over these problems
and and these were I I interviewed
people all these all these different
systems of therapy came up with a bunch
of different claims about stuff but I
I'll just mention uh one of them that
has to do with what one might call uh an
abusive form of of medicine this is um
the sign outside a a government
government research institute for mental
disease this is actually a hospital an
irva cemental hospital that I visited
and one of the the things I noticed at
this hospital I'm just going to give you
one slide of
one treatment intervention I was I was
observing
tal um which is uh involves there's no
really vocabulary or translation for
this I call it a medicated mud pack um
you you see that being packed down upon
a patient's head it's not actually mud
it's um medicinal plants com bound with
with yogurt and kind of pureed and looks
like mud uh they they they do a variety
of impatient treatments at this atic
mental hospital um such as this one
several others involving medications too
um when I when I spoke to to the
patients there they they they said they
liked how the therapy feels you know the
mud mud packs made them feel as they
said common cool they put it on put it
on for like 45 minutes they replace it
after a while with some new m it
actually gets warm right here in this
part of the head and they replace it
with new mud um there's these steaming
treatments that are done as well um they
in in in a way the the the treatment
reminded me of a spa
treatment and because well actually and
interestingly if you go as a tourist to
an ayurvedic Resort in carola India you
can get the same treatments the mental
hospital patient
yet uh by paying for them under idioms
such as ayurvedic massage and so which I
think sort of underlies the what I
thought was very important to me I I I
decided there's something
pleasant to this form of treatment which
I think the patients appreciated and I
couldn't help but think about how that
contrasted with the treatments I saw at
the Mental Hospitals and in right there
also in in carola where they used um
Western biomedical Psychiatry and and
they used uh high doses of of antis
psychotic drugs and electroconvulsive
therapy as treatments um those
treatments were perceived as un
unpleasant as painful they were even
perceived as
punishment by some of the patients who
many of whom left to try another form of
therapy such as irva or or going to one
of these religious sites um so I I
interviewed patients and family members
about this and got this this sort of
picture of how you know the pleasantness
or unpleasantness of the process of
therapy as a factor in therapy and may
cause people to abandon a certain
treatment in favor of another
one and in fact I even try to quantify
this this is a little um just an excerpt
from a an
article um I have it in this edit format
so it says click to add title but
hopefully it's easier to read
um which which showed that um basically
patients offered complaints about the
effects of psychiatric medications and
and
ECT uh regarding their biomedical
allopathic therapy um but but not so
with with ayurvedic therapy aurvedic
ayurveda I argue is is a gentler therapy
um it is not as
abrasive um put put in St ER or Bolder
terms it is less abusive I didn't I I I
published an article called the
importance of a pleasant process of
therapy and I wasn't thinking abuse as I
as I was for this
um for for this meeting um but one could
also use that category abusiveness un
you know not abusiveness in addition to
Pleasant
unpleasant and okay going back to
so here and I want to just reference a
couple other books in this oh wait no
Google meet is asking me something um
I'm just to kind of ignore it wants to
know if it can send me
notifications um so so sa of ARA this
this this book The occupied Clinic came
out recently and it's an examination of
mental health care in Kashmir India and
what what she is is um how casir is a
very different place from Kerala it's
you know under you know Indian military
occupation and it's a very restive state
with a um you know military presence and
uh Mass arrests and detainment of people
who are suspected of being militants and
separatists and uh probably the best
simple illustration of what sa Arma TS
to tell in her book is uh there is a
location in shrinagar Kashmir where
there um there is a wall that is shared
by a mental hospital and a police
station on one side of the wall electric
shock is used as therapy on the other
side of the wall it's used as
torture um but what's interesting too is
that there's no difference in the method
of giving the electric
shocks the the the the therapeutic
therapeutic quotes side um uses
unmodified ECT which means Electro
convulsive therapy without the
anesthetics to counter the pain and the
the the dangerous C effects including
you know breaking bones and and and
teeth uh and and and this use of un
unmodified ECT has has has um it's it's
it happens quite often in India not not
not in all places it has been justified
by psychiatrists as being necessary
um because of the cost of anesthetics in
a low-income country it's true they're
relatively more costly there um and
they're it's sometimes hard to to
procure them so they decide the
rationalization is that that sometimes
ECT is a necessary intervention to in a
crisis situation where someone is
suicidal and depressed or depressed
rather it's not only suicidal um and
they and they they need to do this and
even if the anesthetic is not available
it's still better than not doing it is
the
rationalization um to me that
rationalization is part of the sort of
hegemony of mainstream thinking in
Psychiatry you know that sort of
justifies uh practices like this that
from another point of view from the
other side of the of the wall in the
police station um is is is SE seen as
torture uh and uh this other book uh
China Mills I highl recommended
decolonizing Global mental
health it's it's a it's a critique of
the uh worldwide application of of
western style Psychiatry and she
discusses electroconvulsive therapy as a
form of
abuse and she also discusses unmodified
ECT as something that that happens quite
often in low-income countries and and
how it should should be considered a
form of
torture it is it's it's a it's a very
powerful book it also brings up the as
the title suggests Global mental health
movement so Global mental health is just
sort of Tong but it's actually the
official name of a of an international
movement that some of you may have heard
of uh called the move the movement for
Global mental health that is uh that is
based uh out out at but you know it is
it is run by people at Harvard
University and the London School of
hygiene and tropical medicine
and uh it attempts to bring the benefits
of Psychiatry to low-income countries
places that they feel are are
lacking that uh there's sort of this
justification that like they don't have
enough treatment for mental illness and
we need to bring them Western Psychiatry
to save them I've tried to push back
against that movement in my own writing
by pointing to my research in Indian
saying you know they actually already
have Western Psychiatry there and they
have ired
uh medicine they have and they have
other interventions that they use for
mental health um and they've used for a
long time and a lot of them are very
effective I I know I've spoken to people
they don't need to be saved by more
Psychiatry as it were uh but
nevertheless the movement for Global
mental health has moved forward
expanding the reach of
Psychiatry um through and and expanding
the re reach of psychiatric uh
medication that's one of their main
interventions not not to anyone price
but they do also Advocate other
interventions um
occupational um you know therapy and and
uh forms of talk therapy in in addition
to that but but psycho Pharmaceuticals
is a big part of
that um okay moving
on so sort of transition to some
comments about issues in the US here us
using this let me go back to Google meet
make sure that that's on the screen yeah
so um the mental health and human rights
report of the UN High Commissioner for
human rights um the the most recent one
which is 2018 I I hope another one has
not come out since then that's this is
the most recent one I find uh and I put
the link there if you're interested uh
defines electroc convulsive therapy as a
human rights
abuse even if it's done with anesthetic
even if it's done the normal way in a
way it's actually defining what I call
the normal hegemony of Psychiatry the
sort of normal what's taken to be a
common sense practice use of ECT with
anesthetics the supposedly less
controversial kind of use and it is
branded it as um as as being a form of
abuse or or a form of torture if if if
it is done against people's
consent um and it is often
done by force without without the
consent of of of the
subject so in a way official statement
by the UN is is it is an odds with what
has become normalized practice in in in
Psychiatry so forced
ECT is used in India and it's also
used
uh in the United States um there are are
many cases I just there there was there
was one case as an example um a woman in
Minnesota a couple years
back uh was in um mandated
treatment and and a group of individuals
from isps which I I think most of you
are familiar with the international
Society for psychological and social
approach to psychosis the uh the US
branch of that um got together and
mounted an advocacy campaign on the on
behalf of a particular um woman who who
was uh being treated against her will by
in a hospital by the state of Minnesota
uh she was forcibly being given
ECT and uh and we were encouraged to to
use many different uh paths and our our
approach test uh including writing to
senators and representatives of the
state of Minnesota and that's what I
chose to do I sort of use my I think
it's a really good use of our titles you
know when we have a professional title I
use my you know position as PhD expert
on mental health and my you know
University letterhead and wrote Congress
people saying I've done research on this
issue I think it's a abusive uh and a
violation of of Human Rights uh to to do
this to this person and and furthermore
I I I attached that un report saying
that the UN declares that this is a form
of torture when it's done against the
will of the
individual and um our our our campaign
was successful um legislators did
intervene and uh
discontinue U I forget the details I
don't think that she was released but I
think that they they discontinued some
aspects of of of of the involuntary
treatment um so one can if one has a lot
of allies with uh in the professions one
can you know hopefully pressure and uh
and change this but but but the problem
is again this this continues to be the
sort of normal hegemony of the hegemony
of normal Psychiatry um it'll it'll come
up again and again as the normal
practice to do something that the the UN
considers to be a form of
torture
and then in in an attempt
to uh explain what's behind these
different approaches in in the US and in
India now this is something that's not
worldwide I I I haven't don't claim to
have Sur surveyed worldwide practices of
el electroconvulsive therapy but it is
widely used in IND India and the US and
um and it can be done you know in
involuntarily in both places I I I don't
believe that's the case everywhere other
people have other examples I'd love to
to hear that um so I was I was trying to
uh understand what might
be the reason for such uses or abuses in
in both of these locations and I have
have this term here in instrumentality
intervention and insurance in the US I
think these these are factors in the use
of ECT uh and its normalization in the
United States so instrumentality is
meant to refer to um what I see as a a
cultural uh belief in in the machine uh
that that Technical Solutions can be the
best Solutions U I think there is there
is a thinking along these lines that uh
allows people to think that ECT is a
special powerful and effective
intervention especially in crisis and
then there's the term intervention um
some some other people in medical
Anthropologist have have have described
us biomedical Affair as particularly
interventionist uh and they've given the
examples
of of of cesarian sections at Birth the
the US does more C sections uh compared
to several different countries in in
Europe that were considered comparable
to study for for a variety of reasons
and uh the EXP explanation for this is
well that is that the um in in American
Medical thinking it is the intervention
that is considered to be key in a in a
therapeutic solution um you know G
giving advice changing something in in a
person's lifestyle is is is not the the
default solution in in American Medicine
uh a technical intervention is is is is
is what I would say the hegemonic um way
of thinking and then the insurance
schemes the insur private insurance that
is uh pays for uh medical coverage in
most of the US today uh pays per
procedure okay so you you get you get
paid as a a doctor or or more over a
hospital I should say uh or a clinic U
per procedure not not for thinking if
you if you're a doctor able to figure
out a solution to a problem that's you
know maybe you should try this or maybe
it's actually not a problem um you don't
get reimbursed for that you get
reimbursed for doing something uh
administering the medication and
especially even more for using a machine
to do a procedure so there's a there's a
financial incentive to to do things like
ECT in the US and um know I don't want
to imply that that doctors are are
knowingly you know just doing ECT you
know to to get rich I think again it's
more what I call the hegemonic using
gram sheet kind of thinking it's just
it's just considered normal and it's not
just the individual doctor they work for
usually a larger organization a clinic
and the clinic has a department that
does the billing and I think at the
management level of the clinic there
ends up being sort of a pressure to use
more billable methods that kind of
trickles down to the thinking of the
doctors so it's not just you know many
people depict kind of you know evil
doctors wanting to get rich that's not
it's not that simple it's more of a
institutional level push towards uh such
interventions and then in
India uh I believe there's something
what I call developmentalism or
developmentalist style of thinking that
drives use of
ECT and this is something that
anthropologists have brought up and even
critiqued the whole notion of
development you know there's countries
that are developing underdeveloped Etc
this implies this kind of
that everyone's trying to go to the same
place and that there's this this race to
the top and people are at different
stages um of of
development there's many critiques to
this including that you know not
everyone is going in the same direction
uh or or needs to and and there's a lot
of evidence that that thinking in a
developmentalist way is is uh is quite
damaging uh sometimes to local
institutions so there's a there's a
devel the developmentalist thinking in
in India makes it such that people think
that they need to be doing what the West
is doing they need to
practice a variety of of you know they
need to do medicine they need to to to
do Health Care in the way it's done in
Europe and the UK and that is via
Western medicine and Via lots of
technological interventions and
medicines uh Western biomedicine is
seeing as seen as being all about
medications injections machines and so I
would say there's an extra emphasis on
that um and and a and a belief in that
the the the in increasing use of
Technology um and medicines will allow
India to sort of catch up as it were and
allows a place like India to overlook
local forms of healing such as the
religious therapies or irva that
actually have been useful for many
people as being backwards and
undeveloped and so that gets uh left
behind I would suggest though on the
other hand that there are things that
places like the us could learn could
learn from India uh and the forms of
treatments that are getting left behind
uh the the the gentleness of ayona which
uh patients appreciate you know it's NE
it's never it's never perceived as
abusive um or or or painful by patients
same thing with the religious therapies
it's all you're out you're outside you
know singing doing Pua incens burning
it's engages the senses in a very in a
very positive way um and I think these
these possibilities off offer models of
of of treatment that are quite different
from these um what I've called
normalized abusive therapies um
particularly ECT although one could also
per perhaps make a similar argument for
heavy doses of antis
psychotics uh being a form of uh
normalized abused in in uh in treatment
in the in the US and in India and
perhaps in Europe as
well so I'll I'll end there I'm I'm
eager to hear uh comments reactions
questions
about any of this let me just stop
sharing
here um yes
hel hi hi thanks thanks for the for the
talk um yeah I'm interested I I I read
some of your early work I think around
um psychiatric pluralism many years ago
which which was very influential to some
of my work and um I don't know if it
feels like you've moved a little bit on
from that but I I one of my questions
really because is about the reverse
problem that you're raising which is the
the kind of romanticize ation of um
indigenous healing practices um because
I know of quite a lot of Indian
activists who are quite concerned about
the kind of Western romanticization of
healing practices which can be very
abusive actually so there are cases I
mean we've um we've covered um you know
the a
aardi um uh hospital where the fire and
that was a religious heing Hospital
Hospital right which was set on fire and
um the paat sorry just a
second
sorry have to let the dog out sorry he
sits he sits there and whine whines and
so yeah please go ahead every the
patients were chained to their beds in a
indigenous healing kind of alternative
Hospital many of them died um so I think
that I think we to be careful about the
reverse kind of idea that somehow
Western medicine is all bad and
Indigenous healing methods are all good
you know and I think I think your idea
that I took from your work about
pluralism felt really important um you
know that people had access to a variety
of different um uh possible kind of
support treatments or whatever you want
to call it um so I just wanted if you
had any thoughts on that CU yeah a
little bit concerned about that kind of
that sort of approach which kind of can
miss out on the abuse of I mean it's
like therapies as well which are often
considered gentle but actually can be
very abusive psychoanalysis has got a
pretty checkered history um in the west
as well it's not I'm not just talking
about Eastern practices at all but I
just think we need to be really careful
about not kind of doing another reverse
binary or a kind of alternative wig
wiish kind of History
yeah yeah no good good points um yeah I
I've followed those those debates about
aroti um quite a bit and they come up in
the movement for Global mental health
literature in fact the movement for
Global mental health uses arow as a
justification for more
Psychiatry um and and and actually I I
do have a different interpretation of of
of all that I mean first of all aad was
a traditional Healing Center to me it's
a problem of fire safety it wasn't there
was nothing about the healing system
itself that put the the people at risk
if there had been fire at the mental
hospital biomedical mental hospital
where I also worked um patients there
are also chain to their beds and they
would have been sure but I don't
think that
is sure yeah but I think they were they
were chained to their beds though you
can't deny that they were chained to
their beds and that's why they died they
died because they were chained to their
beds they could yeah exactly but but not
chained down you know actually what they
is like a chain around the ankle and
then there's you know a certain distance
of the chain and it's so they don't
leave so in the in the in the mental hos
in the mental hospital they also use
that method so there's no difference in
the method the chaining or you they're
incarcerated behind bars so they can't
leave so um it's it's you know in thata
in that case I would say it's exactly
the same the dous healing system use the
same method of restraint that is used in
biom medicine and both places are
subject you know to fire risk um the the
the other um form of abuse I mean the
psychiatrist I spoke to in in in India
thought that there were abuses going on
at the religious centers and they
mentioned for example chanara Temple
where I went and I actually did field
work
there the psychiatrist told me that
their um priests will will beat and
abuse people with mental health problems
who are you know going into trance and
things like that for their and um they
they they will be forced to to pound a
nail into a tree with their head until
until it's like until they're bleeding
um was what I was told and then I
actually visited the place and found
that that that wasn't going on in fact
the whole the whole thing that they
describe is is is ritualized so they if
the if the afflicting spirit won't leave
after kie has been invoked um right away
the the spirit will say that if you if
you pound a nail of a certain length
into this tree this particular tree
where H is supposed to reside then I
will leave this person uh so they make a
pledge to pound a nail into a tree and
I've watched them pound the nail they
actually they place it with their head
like this and then they take a coconut
and they pound it in I mean it's sort of
the abuse is actually wasn't actually
real it was like a symbolic thing but
but the psychiatrist who reported this
had never been there you know it just
kind of trickled through the psychiatric
community that there was abuse going on
so while i' I've heard of accusations
abuse of traditional healers when I have
observed the traditional healing I've
not seen it myself so I don't know if
it's if it's nothing more than
psychiatrists you know claiming and at
the same time there there is a problem
with romanticizing traditional medicine
I though I I would say having seen them
all I would still argue with Psychiatry
is more abusive and that abuse is more
easily rationalized there's lots of
studies of traditional healing um Carla
Bam's excellent study at this uh Hussein
T temple in in North India for example
same issue there uh people um who as you
know are are um you as a Devotion to to
the The sukii Who Saint uh who is
interred there will will do things like
chain themselves to a fence at the
temple you know but they're they're
doing that voluntarily it's part of like
their devotional practices I'm going to
put a chain around myself up to the
fence and I'm going to stay here for two
days to show that I'm devoted to and
then that's branded as abusive um but I
would argue that they're voluntarily
doing that whereas like ECT is done
involuntarily um there you know and C
certainly I I would say in um in other
in other health issues you know there is
a danger of romanticizing the indigenous
medicine you know if people look to to
irva for cures for for AIDS and coid um
when they really had nothing that was
that was in that was effective um and I
think that's a very different set of
issues so I I you know just having heard
all this I still go on the side of of I
think that one that alapathi is still
more more abusive um in in the without
without saying that it's impossible that
the others could
be yeah Murphy I I'm interested in um in
your mention of the idea of
instrumentality as being one of the ways
in which the H Hony happens you know
this idea that you know high-tech
interventions are are the good
interventions interventions of machines
and reminds me of the soteria house you
know
um you know the original soteria house
uh was in San Jose California and it was
actually a research project of the
National Institute of Mental Health
uh run by Lauren Moser who was the
psychiatrist who at the time was the
head of the uh schizophrenia research
office at the National Institute of
Mental Health and
um you know the way soteria works is is
basically you have a homik residence in
which people experiencing
psychosis uh come and the message they
get is come on in you can stay here as
long as you want we're going to just
provide you with support safety and
affirmation as you go through the
experience uh because we understand that
even though it's impairing and it's
troubling and scary and and um agitating
uh bizarre somehow this is the way
you're surviving this is the way you're
moving towards healing and recovery so
that's the model uh the model is to help
a person go through the experience in a
safe environment supported environment
well they did a very good study uh where
they compared residents uh treated that
soter with residents treated at the
hospital in the more uh bioc psychiatric
approach Med medications Etc and what
they found was that two years after
treatment the patients treated at soter
were doing better significantly better
in terms of social functioning
employment rehospitalizations and
symptoms uh but the N8 shut it down and
they fired Lauren
hure and that information also got
buried in the N imh it's it it it's
buried it went into the black hole in
the N
imh uh and
so you know because uh Psychiatry was
going towards medication electr
convulsive therapy etc etc so the you
know the problem of instrumentality is
there because uh you know so Terry is
very low Tech I mean so low Tech what
we're doing is just helping this person
go through the experience and we're
using relationship as a as our treatment
and it's solo Tech I imagine talking to
a psychiatrist you know a a recently
trained psychiatrist saying well if you
don't like the he might ask me if you
don't like the drugs what do you
like and I say well what about soteria
you know there's
evidence and I tell him about it and he
says I didn't go to med school for
that you know I'm a
doctor I anybody can do
that right and in some way he was right
because you know the staff at the
original uh soer house it was it was
directed by a licensed clinician but the
staff were non-red dential
people young people who could who could
relate to people in a psychotic
experience who knew how to help people
come down from emergencies crisises etc
etc anyway it's a problem I think it is
a problem uh you know
some of the effective treatments and I
imagine even so-called talk therapy for
many people say how does that work how
the hell is talk there you know
listening to somebody helping somebody
understand their thoughts their you know
understand it seems to be a problem
actually I don't know what to do about
it what do you
think um that's uh no those are those
are good questions uh I I think that one
one thing you're bringing up is the
whole I would call it sort of the battle
over evidence that's involved in a lot
of these therapies that you know you're
you're you're you're saying that there's
evidence of of effectiveness of soar
house and that that in the end doesn't
seem to matter um I think we're seeing a
similar thing over open dialogue you
know there's there's there's actually a
lot of that the team and torneo has
published articles that show you know
Effectiveness and I think you know even
um you know there's been discussion of
what what what counts as evidence-based
you know there's definitely I mean
there's there's a there's a big clinical
trial right of open dialogue in the UK
that may that may count as evidence
actually in the mainstream debates but
um I think that you know despite
evidence can people can still can still
push it aside I think there's the
machine the instrumentality there's the
machine in medicine bias so even if you
do have evidence you know evidence of
talk therapy somehow tends to be
overlooked and like no we're going to go
for the machine anyway because it's just
compelling yeah like you said what did I
go to medical school for um many doctors
and and who who do not choose Psychiatry
from you know right from the beginning
you know are are first and foros W
wanting to be heroic technicians and I
in fact I had a um a young doctor uh
family friend staying with me from India
earlier this year for a few months and I
got to hear all about him and his uh
recent graduates from medical schools
you know Elite medical schools
throughout India and you know he would
mention you know friends he knew who
wanted to go into Psychiatry not because
of any interest in mental health I mean
the decisions were all based on income
and where there are opportunities you
know where you could get get a residency
and internship um and all of these
students they're all just it's all the
science model they were not interested
in talk you know all of the publishing
that a lot of these students did do this
thing where they a lot of American
doctors now Outsource publishing to
young Indian medical students or
graduates and these were the guys that
did this writing all of the writing on
mental health is all about medications
and uh other other interventions that
are instrumental rather than there's no
you know talk never came up as a as a as
a topic so um I think um yeah that
that's that's a big issue there's the
power at least I would say more so in
the
US the idea of the technology and the
Machine as being a savior I think um is
is a big factor in our thinking we're
not just looking at evidence certain
evidence is more exciting than others
anyway um it's just a few thoughts about
that Mia did you have any thoughts about
that I think it's so so interesting
what's happening with open dialogue in
terms of the what I call the struggle
over
evidence
we're not hearing you
Well's I think there's a problem with
Mia's audio having trouble
hearing
but you're
just sorry we can
Mia you're coming in in bits and pieces
maybe it's a maybe it's a weak
connection can you hear me
now yeah yeah okay so I I'm I'm uh aware
that there's not much time but thank you
very much and and I think that there are
many people who are talking about the
shift in in Paradigm uh in in many ways
and and open dialogues or open dialogue
informed or inspired practices are are
taking place in in many parts of the
world but this question about the
evidence is always there and and who
gets to Define that uh who gets to
define the the designs for the the
research and so on so that's that's a
huge part of the conversation all the
time but I'm also wondering uh because
as we
all have experience from from our points
of views from different parts of the
world that that the pandemic was um
really changing um the life and
perception of life in many ways for
people around the
world I think it would be so interesting
to
to because I I think at least in Finland
people are asking very different
questions when they contact to the
mental health services as they did
before there's a much more kind of a
hope for for diagnosis or different
kinds of
definitions uh about their qualities or
about the challenges they are
facing uh and that has been a very uh
rapid uh change at least in Finland uh
and we are discussing about that a lot
and that again is for me it is connected
to the human rights and um and for
example the next week's launch that that
uh happens in in wh when they are
launching this new guidance on on human
rights and and mental health legislation
and policies but uh yeah many thoughts
thank you so much um Murphy for your
presentation and and all the others for
the comments very
inspiring okay all right thank you yeah
thank you for those comments if I could
actually ask just one final quick
question I mentioned I that I'm not
really aware of policies in other
countries regarding whether uh ECT can
be done
involuntarily um did anybody else have
any observations whether in I don't know
Finland or Spain or UK whether um places
you know of whether they're what the
rule what the laws are on on ECT
and
no as far as I know from my 20 year
experience in Finland it is not possible
to to do ECT
involuntarily the legislation doesn't
allow that but then again I don't know
if there has been any changes but not in
my
experiences okay great in in the UK it
can be given
involuntary um usually it's given to
people who probably are considered
unable to consent because they are
usually
um very poorly but you can definitely um
give it without consent for sure I think
you need um maybe two medical um
psychiatrists to to sign it off but it's
definitely possible to give it
involuntary say the justification is
that it wouldn't you know that people
are no longer in when they're given e
they're no longer in a position to give
consent but what what we argue for in
the UK is a kind of advanced directives
and you know to be able to say would or
wouldn't if you were so unwell whether
you you know you would give or or so to
make advanced directives more legally
binding currently they're not so that
that is a problem for
sure oh Al I you're I think you're muted
here thank you Mia I I didn't understand
I didn't understand your point about
about the the difference that occurred
or the change uh driven by the pandemic
were you're saying that patients now are
more they they more wanted diagnosis
they're more interested in diagnostic
allopathic uh bio medicine that kind of
thing yes uh especially around uh
neurodiversity uh this is a big theme in
in Finland and in in other Scandinavian
countries as well and and as I have
learned in I was meeting with the group
from Brazil a few weeks ago and and they
were talking about the same that that
people well first of all of course uh
because the the so-called mental health
uh problems or challenges they were
increasing a lot during the the
lockdowns so people are suffering more
at the moment and that suffering is is
kind of defined as a mental health
problem or or psychiatric diagnosis so
people are contacting nowadays
with
more uh kind of focused convers kind of
a uh question that do I have this or
that diagnosis or I have been looking
that I have this and I need your
confirmation uh on that so this is what
we are kind of trying to figure out now
here in Finland and in our services that
what do we do with this kind of uh what
are the needs that there are in in among
citizens at the moment what are they
hoping from the mental have
Services yeah so this whole thing about
neurodiversity uh people talking about
neur diversity what what are the
interventions that are used for if
people say well I'm just neur neuronally
diverse what kind of intervention does a
person want uh or if they do want
interventions I I don't know I yes
that's a very good question well first
of all they want to have a of course
there is the diagnostical procedures for
that uh and then some
people
and and this is the huge question that
we
and I am not saying that these
challenges are real of course there are
challenges and and many ways to to
discuss and
support that it has been kind of uh
exploding the the need for these
definitions that that we need to rethink
that what are we talking about here and
and and how can we respond as a mental
health uh system into these
questions MH
I don't think the neurodiversity
Paradigm um necessarily results in more
medical interventions I think
neurodiversity Paradigm introduces a
social model of disability so it's more
about Society making accommodations to
people with with neurod divergences
rather than saying that they should be
treated and that that would be the the
implication of a neurodiversity paradigm
as opposed to a medicalized paradigm of
of um autism or whatever that's slightly
different so neurodiversity Paradigm is
a different Paradigm to a to a
medicalized
one it could be used as a justification
to push back against treatment actually
to sort of say I'm neurodiverse I don't
need the medicine or
the but comes at the moment it does come
to the Psychiatry yeah it's it's
directly there so this is this is very
good point Thank you so it's something
that should be discussed further here as
well I think we're moving on to to the
next talk now though thank you thank you
everybody thank you I need to go to
another meeting unfortunately but I'm
sorry to miss the next
walk okay thank you thank you for your
comments thank you bye
bye okay I apologize I was telling Peter
that he can he can start his
presentation it is lovely to be able to
have a debate and conversation and there
is so much to say about the expectations
and does that coconut work only because
well may they really be supporting soia
does in a way in which doesn't force
them to believe that this is for life
like the belief
system for getting theism about the
condition is that this the recovery is
possible it doesn't matter the technique
it's hopefully not a
it's the coconut hopefully not a
diabetic coma it's like not that we have
many better techniques here and that but
yeah I just stop here I introduce
Peter he's from Tech Republic he's
director of the mental health system
there correct me if I'm wrong
Peter
oh you're you're you're muted I believe
we can't hear
you you're muted uh
Peter I think he's unmuted now but we
we're still not hearing
him yeah
morphy can you can you develop on that I
I would like to know if you have any you
have studied this system there do you
know if it still works better in the
sense that there is
recovery I know in other regions The
psychosis tends to
be temporal I mean it is not for
Life yeah it is the case there yeah yeah
I mean in
India yeah yeah yeah there's actually
been a lot of research done on on that
and I I've written on that myself that's
a that's a big story in itself but but
yeah there's a you know India was one of
the main sites in the who international
study of epidemiology of schizophrenia
and had the had the best results of any
place they studied and I was I've been
trying to explain why in in some of my
work but I'll I'll just say that for now
a quick
answer Peter we cannot hear
you
hello
Peter I lost connection myself I
apologize
oh he said he said he was going to um
log off and log on log on again let see
if that
helps
Al something Mor is the The Possession
Paradigm the the spiritual part of it
yeah I would love to to read about your
work on that and if they differentiate
like the Vatican seem they have or
others that work also in that there is a
possession but only in certain cases
what is the criteria to
differentiate oh yeah no that that's a
very interesting yeah issue in itself
yeah whether they really are
equivalent well now now it looks like
you're still on mute I see the mute
icon
maybe what MIA said something about you
may need to give Google permission to
use your microphone is there a prompt
for
that
Mor can
you see that
microphone icon can you click on that
you yeah you're now supposed to be able
to to
talk oh oh yeah no I sorry sorry I I I I
was looking at the wrong one what is
Peter now he disconnected oh he I think
think he maybe he left again to try to
come on again
okay do
I maybe did you make him a host I wonder
if that can
help I was around yes I did try but
obviously if he was yeah going out and
inside
again what
how many years you were in in
India um I I I guess all together maybe
two and a half but in in different trips
spaced out you like a year and then nine
months and then three
months